[Music]
this video was made possible by
curiositystream
watch thousands of high quality
documentaries and get access to nebula
by using the link in the description
this is a rotodyne and it might look
like a helicopter
and an airplane smashed together but
it's neither
it's a lot more revolutionary
because when it debuted over 60 years
ago
the rotodyne was going to be a new form
of mass transport
the quickest way to move from one city
center to the next
landing on downtown rooftops and
heliports
but flying much faster further and more
economically
than any helicopter and airlines
were interested but then as the rotodyne
looked
set to revolutionize intercity transport
it just disappeared
[Music]
to understand why this machine was so
revolutionary
consider that it doesn't work like a
helicopter
a helicopter uses engine power to spin a
rotor blade
which forces air down to create lift
tilting the rotor
is what allows the helicopter to move in
a given direction
that's the basic idea but that's not how
a rhododyne works
on a rhododyne the large rotor isn't
powered
it isn't even connected to a motor
instead as
air passes naturally through the rotor
blades it causes the rotor to
spin around like a pinwheel and this
creates lift the rotodyne still has
wings and a pair of turbo props
much like an airplane but in forward
flight the unpowered spinning rotor
lifts more than half the aircraft's
weight
with this unique design the rotodyne
flew faster than
any helicopter of the era and it was far
more efficient
and even though the rotor wasn't driven
by a motor
the rotodyne could still hover and take
off and land vertically
just like any helicopter that's because
at the end of each rotor blade
were small tip jets during takeoff and
landing
fuel and compressed air supplied by the
turboprops would ignite to spin up the
rotor
once in forward flight the tip jets were
shut off and the rotor would once again
spin freely
by 1959 the rotodyne was attracting
worldwide interest
because for one thing it promised to
revolutionize the way we traveled
between cities
in the 1950s and 60s intercity air
travel
was on the rise but while a trip from
new york to boston by airplane
might only take about an hour you'd also
need to get
to and from the airport and in many
congested cities
that was beginning to take longer than
the flight itself
one solution was to use helicopters
in april the new helicopter service is
due to open from the top of the pan am
building
right in the middle of manhattan island
if the service does come about
you'll be taking off from the fourth
highest building in new york 59 stories
up
it's hoped that eventually the service
will carry 5000 passengers
a day 5 000 passengers who would
otherwise be condemned to this
by the 1960s helicopter airlines had
cropped up in major american cities
letting passengers skip the traffic by
flying
right over it the problem was
none of them were actually making money
because
helicopters were simply too inefficient
operating anywhere from 20 to 30 cents
per seat mile
and the only way helicopter airlines
like new york airways could even exist
was through government subsidies to
offset operational costs
but the rotodime was going to change all
that bringing costs
down to as little as four cents per seat
mile
which would make helicopter airlines
profitable and the rotodyne
wasn't just a better helicopter with
vastly improved speed and range
it would be a new way to travel between
cities
linking one city center to the next
[Music]
the concept behind the roto-dyne dates
all the way back to the early 1920s
when a pioneering spanish inventor set
out to build a safer plane
by adding an unpowered freely spinning
rotor
his planes could fly slowly without
stalling making them
inherently safer than airplanes in fact
without any forward motion
the planes would simply glide back to
earth slower
than a parachute they were called
autogyros
over the years they were used in
military reconnaissance
and even to deliver mail but by the
1940s helicopter technology improved
and autogyros largely fell out of favor
but decades later british aircraft
manufacturer
fairy aviation still saw enormous
potential in the autogyro concept
if the vertical takeoff and landing
capability of a helicopter
could be combined with the speed and
efficiency of an airplane
ferry would have something truly special
on their hands
with the help of funding from the
british government the first rotodyne
prototype took to the skies in 1957
it could carry 40 passengers 700
kilometers and reach speeds of
over 300 kilometers an hour all while
being able to land and take off on a
space
not much larger than the aircraft itself
and after
350 successful test flights the
rhododyne proved to be safe and capable
but of course it all went to
for one the rhododyn's tip jets made a
lot of noise
and that was going to be a problem right
in the middle of a city
from the start there were doubts about
whether the public would tolerate it
and noise is often believed to be the
reason why the rhododine failed
but that's not the whole story after
proving their prototype
ferry moved on to develop a production
version
a larger more capable rotodyne that
could carry up to 75 passengers
and it promised to be quieter ferry
spent years developing noise suppressor
technology
for the rhododyn's tip jets and while
progress was slow
by 1960 the engineering team had reduced
noise by over 15 percent
and airlines were interested with small
orders coming in from around the world
not bad for an entirely new kind of
transport
but to get the production version built
ferry still needed about 10 million more
in funding from the british government
and it was money they'd never get
because at the start of the 1960s
britain's aviation industry was a mess
too many aircraft builders were building
too few planes
and relying heavily on
government-sponsored projects
the solution was to force these
companies including ferry aviation
to merge and the rhododine got caught in
the shuffle
competing with a number of other
helicopter projects
progress was also slowed by difficulty
sourcing more powerful engines
and the need to reduce tip jet noise
even further
when it became clear that the rotodyne
wouldn't be delivered to airlines on
time
and the eventual cost of each rotodyne
would have been too
high one by one orders were cancelled
in 1962 the british government facing
economic pressures
suddenly pulled funding for rotodyne
development
and the half helicopter half plane once
promising to revolutionize inter-city
travel
just disappeared the working prototype
and technical research were quickly
destroyed
leaving only a few small pieces for
museum display
the rotadyne failed to change air travel
and only a single prototype was ever
built
but not all ambitious leaps forward in
engineering
lead to such failure take the dc-3
a machine that in its time
revolutionized air travel
and earned a legendary status in wartime
over 16 000 dc3 variants were built
this remarkable plane took the disguise
just three decades after the wright
brothers first flight
and yet hundreds of dc-3s are still
flying today
learn about this plane's incredible
story on curiosity stream
a streaming service with thousands of
full-length documentaries
by some of the best filmmakers in the
world from history and nature
to engineering and design you can get an
entire year of curiosity stream
for just 19.99 but if you sign
up using the link in the description
you'll also
get a subscription to nebula an exciting
new platform
built by some of youtube's top
educational creators
nebula is where creators make content
for their audience
without worrying about youtube's
recommendation algorithm
and annoying ads get a year of curiosity
stream and access to nebula by going to
curiositystream.com
mustard and using the promo code mustard
when you sign up
you